where do photons come from I'm curious
why we say the universe exploded in the
Big Bang why black holes can't just be
dark matter why when a star goes
Supernova space still bent for a black
hole gravitational waves the fabric of
space did you get all of that
wow wo that's somebody has red bull that
morning this is Star Talk Neil degrass
Tyson here your personal astrophysicist
we're doing Cosmic queries today grab
bag oh yeah and I look to my left I
don't see Chuck Nice Chuck what did you
do we look a little
different Harrison greenbound welcome
back to Star Talk yes it's so nice to be
here thank you for having me yeah last
time it was
BC before Co when you last made made an
appearance we had a whole pandemo in
between a whole pandemic in between and
also you had like a Las Vegas residency
in there yeah I went across the country
and back in that time and back so just
congratulations on where where your
talents have taken you thank you now
you're right here in my office at the
American Museum of Natural History as
much going on here as the circus I will
say no well the universe is a circus
unto itself absolutely and it's many
more than three rings going on there yes
Saturn's got Rings multiple ring circus
in the cosmos so this is a grab bag and
you've got the questions I haven't seen
them and because it's a grab bag I it's
a grab EG without it an expert that we
bring in so I'm your expert fantastic
I'll do my best if I don't know an
answer I'll just say I don't know okay
okay but you have to we have
Siri we do have we have tools at our we
have ch you've got you the ways to bail
me out is what you're saying okay all
right we don't know it might be known
okay all right so what do you have first
all right so we have Lena McGrath she
wres hello Neil I'm Lena from Orlando
where do photons come from for instance
are they already inside my birthday
candles or are they created from the
fire oh I love that does not specify
what birthday she is on does not okay
does not but the fact that she's still
uses candles yeah what what age would
you say you stop using candles once the
cake is too full yeah I I think I
stopped at 30 I oh wow that's longer
than I last I made it I made it high in
there I think after high school I was
candle free
so it's a great question it's
reminiscent of a famous essay from the
19th century written by Michael farad
and it's called what is fire oo because
what is it it's an emoji I use too often
oh okay I've seen the Emoji can you
touch it can you grab it can you hold it
not really so what is it so that's a
famous essay from the from the 19th
century so a photon is a packet of
energy a pure energy and it moves at the
speed of
light it's the only thing it knows how
to do is move at the speed of light and
so if by the way energy can manifest in
a dozen many different ways okay you can
have potential energy now why is it that
you can harm yourself by jumping out of
a window okay there there's a reason for
it because when you hit the ground
energy killed you I thought it was the
sidewalk
okay you had energy in your body yeah
while you were falling one Red Bull
right before the show right and that oh
yes and the energy kept accumulating as
you fell faster and faster right then
you hit the sidewalk all the energy that
was in
you from your motion kinetic energy goes
back into you as mechanical energy and
the only way your body can accommodate
mechanical energy is to Break Stuff
because it takes energy to break your
bones sure energy can manifest in
different ways and the higher you take
the elevator before you jump out the
window the more energy you have to break
your bones upon hitting the sidewalk
that's why jumps from higher altitudes
will do more damage than from lower
altitud but if you're watching this and
thinking about it don't do it do not try
this at home now above a certain height
there's a air resistance you hit what's
called a terminal velocity where the air
is absorbing away some of that ener
about to terminate to be terminated
terminal velocity to be terminated so
there are other ways that energy can be
stored like inside of an atom an
electron can sit in many different
energy levels the atom has energy levels
within it it's not a continuous uh
placement of energies if there's an
electron at a higher energy level and
something happens to make a drop to a
lower energy level it just lost energy
where did it go actually it can go in
one of two places if another atom hits
it some of the energy of that electron
can go to the kinetic energy of the
other atom as it Carin off this happens
a lot so it's a kinetic
energy a fly by Looting of its energy
all right so but occasionally it just
sort of jostles it the electron de
excites goes to a lower energy level
where does that energy go bada bing a
phot is released from the atom of
exactly the same energy as the
difference between the energy levels of
the electron all the energy is is is
accounted for and so and the photon goes
in in a random Direction at the speed of
light that's where photons come from
they come from ways that used to be
energy in an atom or some or or the
vibrations of atoms and and and
molecules and and other particles and
and in those vibrations it can lose
energy by releasing a photon and that's
that's what's going on and it happens
all kinds of ways if you have an
electric stove and you turn it on and
eventually it glows go like blue orange
different colors I hope your stove
doesn't
glob Glo you can tell by the way how
much I cook by my inability to answer
this question you have no idea St is you
have no idea what you are right
astrophysically but in a kitchen you're
completely wrong okay so the hottest
your stove is going to get is red hot
gotcha but if you could if you had an
infinite knob it would go it would go
white hot and eventually blue hot that's
gonna be my band name if I ever form a
band infinite knob oh infinite knob blue
hot's better but one of those pick one
I'm good with you I'll come see you okay
great so the fact that the stove is
glowing red is emitting light red light
so you have
vibrating particles in the heating
element of the stove and those
vibrations will actually release light
and and that in a way is cooling the
stove except you keep pumping energy
into the stove right right if you turn
off the stove it's still glowing red but
then it sort of Fades away why because
it's giving up all its energy without it
being replaced and if it's hot but not
glowing red it's still giving off
photons but not red photons if it's hot
what do you generally what what what is
that do you remember don't touch it no
don't still touch it until it's cool so
it would actually if you put on infrared
goggles it would be glowing in the
infrared that's still a form of Light
have infrared photons so all these ways
will generate photons and stars are
doing it every moment of their lives and
photons are crisscrossing through the
Universe um and it'll continue that way
until the last star dies so how what do
that to do with birthday candles oh oh
yeah very good okay thank you for
bringing it back on point I feel like Le
Lena is at home right now she's
celebrating her birthday the candle's
already melted down ruin the cake it's
like Neil where's the answer so uh you
have to give energy to the candle from
somewhere else a lighter or a match
right there's no free lunch here right
the energy got to so what that will do
free cake okay free cake you will light
the the the the wick you'll light the
wick of the
candle which is typically
coated in wax because the candles are
made of wax so you
ignite the
wick that will use molten wax as a fuel
source there you have it now why doesn't
the whole candle burn up in one instant
because the the wick is drawing the
molten wax in and if you have too much
of the
wax it'll put out the flame you need
just the right amount to feed it and
keep it going and candles are beautiful
this way okay if the candle gets sort of
you know if you if you have you tried
this who has candles anymore but you
have like the a 3-in candle let's say
and it's got liquid there if you sort of
tip liquid towards the wick you can
extinguish the wick right you say well
why is that if it's using the wick to
light have you ever questioned this I
have a couple of scented candles U most
of them smell like my apartment burning
down when I fall asleep why does the
liquid wax put out the wick when the
wick needs the liquid wax to burn right
because it's too much at a given time
it's too much so the wick draws it at
just the right amount that it could burn
the little bitty drops that come in at
the rate that you need
so the energy the starter energy comes
from the match or from a lighter and you
hit the wick now the wick simply
burns the wax and wax is one of the
great things that kept us lit for
centuries wax candles the you know 17th
18th centuries uh we didn't have light
bulbs so candles was a thing wax candles
so wax is a is a fuel
source by the way if you get wax hot
enough where it goes molten and you just
keep heating it it can burn without a
wick
what so this happened to me at home I
ignited the entire surface of the of the
liquid wax in the pot and I thought told
the police it was an
accident no I used to make candles okay
I'm just trying to picture this birthday
party okay I used to make candles so you
melt the candles and you can dip what
happens you dip a wick in so it gets wet
with W with um wet wax you put it in the
air air room temperature air will cool
the wax and then it's a skinny candle
you dip it again and it keeps building
layers and layers until there the
thickness you want okay that's one way
to make it that's as you make a a dip C
another just pour it into a into a mold
okay so I melted this pot I had all
these candle shards right and you put
them all in there you pull out the dead
Wicks and now I have I have I have
liquid candle wax and I left it on the
stove too
long it ignited you can't put water on
it oh no it is hotter than boiling water
so if you put water in there the water
will be heated start to boil and then
it'll
boil fragments of flaming wax out of out
of the so there's only one way to put
out that fire throw it out the
window hope it's potential energy is
high enough yeah now you're G to give it
extra potential energy so or kinetic
energy so no you got to take a lid and
cover it and that'll smother it put a a
l exciting answer totally less exciting
but I knew suffocated I knew enough
about yeah you're suffocating it I knew
enough about thermodynamics that that's
how you do that so the candle doesn't
all burn at once because it can only
burn a little bit at a time and it burns
its way down and there you have it nice
well happy birthday Lena I yes however
old you are hey Star Talk fans I don't
know if you know this but the audio
version of the podcast actually posts a
week in advance of the video version and
you can get that in Spotify an apple
podcast and most other podcast Outlets
that are out there multiple ways to
ingest all that is Cosmic on Star Talk
oh by the way these are all our patreon
supporters these are they pay amazing so
you get to ask questions as a patreon
supporter at our entry level amount
which like $5 a month so go for it all
right so we have Alan Ry he wrote hello
everyone waving Emoji Cowboy Emoji it's
Alan from Lithuania a lot of cowboys
always wondered about gravitational
waves please explain how and what did
they actually detect in 2015 oh very
nice yeah so that's the first detection
of gravitational waves was then nice
interestingly it was the sentennial the
near Centennial I think the prediction
came out in
1916 but basically the Centennial of
Einstein's prediction that such a thing
even exists so it took a century to
verify that what he predicted was
correct so just to put that in context
all right so the way this works is um
according to Einstein's general theory
of relativity we're you're here and you
have we say you have a gravitational
force I don't know if you knew that but
you do right I like it okay and The more
mass you have the more is your
gravitational force I've had an
increasing amount of gravitational force
over the last few years is that right
okay so it'll go up according to your
mass and we can measure that the more
importantly if you move through space
and
time then your gravitational field needs
to respond to that in some way because
it used to be over here and now you're
over there Newton described gravity as
just a force at a
distance okay action at a distance but
he was still mystified how could it Gap
the vacuum of space what's going on how
do we know each other how do we know
about what why do we know why his he
knew his equations worked so he went
with it but that's some confidence it's
still he like I know these are right I
can't I can't prove it but I am 100%
sure I can't demonstrate it what's going
on in the mystery of the vacuum of space
but it's working so exhibit a trust me
trust me so it's working and Einstein
said gravity is not so much action at a
distance gravity is a
is a disturbance in the fabric of space
and
time so disturbance is too violent uh it
is a
shape of the fabric of space and time
made by the existence of matter and
energy wherever you might find it let's
take a black hole for example a black
hole is such a distortion of space and
time that light cannot even Escape
that's why we call it black and you
can't come out it's a ho black hole best
named thing there ever was ever so if
you're just somebody wandering by a
black hole you'll feel your trajectory
altered by it Newton would say that's
action at a distance Einstein would say
that is the
shape of curved
SpaceTime and you're just following
where space and time wants to bring
you it's like in NASCAR are they
actually turning
left no because the track is banked the
bank turns them forth turns the cars the
drivers would have would be very upset
by this like what are we what are we
training
for yeah so their steering is primarily
maneuvering in the traffic rather than
making a left turn as they go around the
track so the track is shaping their path
in the same way space and time will
shape the path of
anything moving but light is the best
Tracer of this what happens when two
black holes Collide OMG black holes
Collide they are already a disturbance
in the SpaceTime Continuum now they come
together it is such a disturbance that
they will create a ripple in the fabric
of space and time emanating at the speed
of light a ripple because as they come
closer and closer they they spiral and
faster and faster and then they come
together and right at that instant poof
there's a
ripple the first of these that was
discovered have been traveling for 3
billion years how do you detect it we
need special equipment we call it Lio
laser interferometer gravitational wave
Observatory sensibly abbreviated ligo so
they have two I forgot how long they are
kilometer long
tunnels evacuated no air they have
lasers that simultaneously go up the
tunnel and back from a mirror that's at
the other end these two laser beams know
about each other they are
coherent they March to the beat of the
same drummer when emitted if on the up
and back trip something happened to the
fabric of
SpaceTime then one of those paths will
be slightly different from the other
slightly longer or slightly shorter and
then the waves will no longer match up
and you can conclude that something
happened here that didn't happened there
they're at right angles to each other so
this wave this this gravitational wave
as it washes over the
observatory depending on which angle was
oriented relative to the wave they will
stretch or expand by different amounts
from each other and they measure this
they measured it they knew what two
colliding black hole should look like in
their experiment matched up the
announcement gets made Nobel Prize is
awarded now just for context you said
with a tone of voice that they were it
was later discovered that it was wrong
no no no no I have a follow on to that
2017 they took it back turns out one of
them just jostled the machine a little
bit no they only discovered it in 2015
no prizes later gotcha okay all right so
many people don't know that Einstein
wrote down the first equation
that Ena the laser to be invented later
on this isums on his plate right okay
when you're that brilliant crumbs do
great things because you're focusing on
the main events like the theory of
relativity and other things the back
page of his notebook just said tunnel
laser so Einstein invents a new theory
of the universe the general theory of
relativity that predicts the existence
of gravitational waves shortly after
that he writes writes down the equation
that permits the invention of the
laser decades later people invent the
laser decades after that they use the
laser to measure and discover the
existence of gravitational waves and
entertain cats
yes Einstein's a badass 100% people
getting Nobel prizes off of crumbs that
fell off his plate he should have had
eight Nobel prizes right he got how did
he get one yeah he got one he got one
okay okay good he got one but for other
stuff I mean not for his greatest work
he did for really important work but not
his greatest work he demonstrated that
Adams actually exist so that's pretty
good that's I would say I would say
yeah and he
demonstrated that light comes in
discreet packets called photons which we
just talked about we just talked about
so that's good that's you do that in a
lifetime you did good but he did that
and then just kept going yeah but at the
same time I was learning magic and you
were nearly burning your house down with
the biggest wax
candle that's the backstory and the lead
scientist on this was Kip Thorne yeah
Kip Thorne people who read movie credits
will recognize Kip Thorn as one of the
co-executive producers of the film
Interstellar nice that M that that's how
you knew if there's going to be any
black holes in it they're going to get
it right yes okay you don't have to
double check that one he's got it yeah
yeah I love that all right give me some
more all right well we were talking
about the Fabrica space so it makes
sense to bring this question up because
Matt D wrote greetings Dr Tyson I'm Matt
from Oklahoma and have a question about
the fabric of space in all caps what is
it you tear it like cloth fiber and sew
it back together take it easy Matt okay
all right uh so he's he has issues with
the word fabric maybe I it sounds like
he thinks it is a fabric well it does
stretch like her style all right so the
universe stretches but we don't know how
much longer it will continue to stretch
oh it's like my pants eventually it
snaps been there done that I think we
did a whole episode or a whole section
of an episode on the future of the
universe one of the possible Futures
is it will expand so
rapidly that the fabric of the universe
cannot keep up with it and it will
rip and it's called the Big Rip and I
I'm terrifi I'm I'm terrified by this
because I I finally grew accustomed to
the stretching of space and time
whatever even that means right now
you're going to tell me it's stretching
and it's going to rip oh my gosh so do
we know where it's going to rip are we
near the rip site do we need to move a
little bit put some some pre- stitches
in it to keep it going yeah no I it was
it would rip at its very core all places
within the fabric would just disassemble
rip and fabric go together as two words
but before we use the word rip and the
fabric we spoke of space as a rubber
sheet that stretches and maybe it can
stretch forever like we don't know we
just don't know so now the specifics of
the question was what it just said what
is it what is the fabric all we can say
is space
behaves as though it is a stretchy
substance
pick any word you want to give it right
maybe we should have called the Lyra of
the universe or or the the nepr right I
I don't know call call it anything but
we try to find an analogy that can make
it more understandable to you to anyone
to ourselves so fabric of the universe
uh seems to fit the bill very well right
on up to the rip right so so that's why
and and and that's when everything in
the universe disassembles including us
oh you're aren't you you're made of
things in the universe so yeah I was
trying to be
optimistic yeah all the the electrons
protons and neutrons they're not all
going to break apart but you'll be
intact okay exact that'll be do I feel
it yeah I'm I'm terrified by it I it it
is if it happens at all it'll happen in
22 billion years oh so we're okay we're
okay no I got it on my on my calendar
so fabric is is metaphor but it's a very
apt metaphor for what the universe is
because the universe can curve it can
curve back on itself it can stretch if
you're not happy with fabric come up
with another term but I think we're good
think it's pretty good all right all
right this question comes from geizer
windbag Readings Dr Tyson I'm curious
why we say the universe exploded in the
Bing Big Bang it seems to me more likely
that the singularity expanded and
fragmented and the universe we see is
still all within the singularity an
observer outside the original
Singularity would still see a
singularity though from our perspective
the universe is incredibly huge thoughts
okay so a couple of things the if he
doesn't like the word explosion I'm okay
with that because the singularity that
birthed the universe was the rapid
stretching of SpaceTime there we go see
what I did there so the rapid
stretching you can say was there an
explosion you know what an explosion is
it is a rapidly moving Shockwave within
a medium that's what blows out windows
and door blows down doors it's a shock
wave moving through the air well the Big
Bang is not a thing moving through
something else it is the expansion of
space and time so it's more accurate to
say it's the big stretch rather than the
Big Bang the Big
Bang was used pejoratively by when now
I'm going back 70 years by an opponent
of the Big Bang who couldn't imagine
Universe would begin this way he wanted
the universe to be in a steady state at
all times and he's and so he used the
term Big Bang as an insult to the ideas
that people were having he came in he
said you know what this theory is a is a
big stretch and they're like you have no
idea how right you are you have you're
that's exactly right this is a stretch
that's that's it so yeah it's metaphor
but we're good with it m all right cool
well thank you Geyer windbag no no but
he asked something else about it he said
is it more likely that the singularity
expanded and fragmented and the universe
we see is still all within the
singularity we are no longer The
Singularity so anyone observing us will
not say they look like a
singularity uh the interesting question
is if you look at the math of our
universe out to the
Horizon the density of matter within it
the size of the Horizon if you run the
math we have all the same properties of
an authentic black hole and black holes
have singularities in their Center so
are we some Mondo black hole is there a
point where the similarities end we
don't know we could all be in a black
hole yes yes yes I I have a book on my
shelf that describes the new SpaceTime
that opens up after you fall into a
black hole time changes for you go takes
more slowly relative to everybody
outside the black hole so as you fall in
you will see the entire future future
history of the universe unfold before
your very eyes and a new SpaceTime
Continuum open up that sounds awesome
a m is the being ripped
apart m is the the being ripped apart
part yeah uh so if the black hole is big
enough the title forces won't rip you
apart you can survive the fall oh that's
cool yeah yeah yeah yeah it's good it
kind of feels like a way to go like if I
totally want to go that way don't you
know rather get hit by a bus or laid up
in the hospital launch me into a black
hole I'll Give All My reports until I
can't yeah all right so we have elizer
Vega uh hello Dr Tyson this is Elis are
from Puerto Rico Puerto Rico I love that
place is that your best way you could
pronounce it Puerto Rico all right give
give you B+ all right Puerto Rico I have
a last Gap to fill with gravity If
gravity is the effect of the mass
bending space then why when a star goes
Supernova space still bent for a black
hole to form instead of immediately
unbending it is as matter is blown apart
or better said what makes space remember
what was there before so when it blows
and matter is dispersed space won't
recover back but stay bent as a black
hole did you get all of that wow stars
above a certain Mass when they die will
go as Supernova and they leave behind a
neutron star stars of even higher Mass
we we're not entirely certain of the the
boundary of this but stars of a higher
Mass can go supernova and make a black
hole stars of even high high mass the
Supernova never gets out black hole all
the way so only in that last case is all
the mass of the entire system part of
the black hole and the SpaceTime
curvature at the end was the same as it
was in the beginning whereas the one
where some gets blown out and others
become a black hole Yeah that black hole
does not have the full gravity that the
whole system had before because half of
it got blown away it's that simple so
he's right to think about this but the
answer is not that deep that's pretty
good okay Matthew jury wrote hello
everyone uh how can a gravitational
singularity exists if infinite curvature
means infinite time we do not have a
good way to talk about the singularity
would you say the jury is
out what I would say is that's why we
have string theorists to bridge the gap
between quantum physics and general
relativity one the theory of the small
the other the theory of the large but at
the beginning of the universe the large
was small whole universes were operating
in the quantum realm and I've seen
Ant-Man I get it yeah yeah you go okay
so if that's the case what's happening
at the singularity because you don't get
singularities in quantum physics you get
it in general
relativity so that's where it's been
said the singularity is where God
divides by
Zero have you divided by zero lately
error yes yes yes error error I do a
magic trick where I have people put
stuff into a calculator and if they
divide by zero there's no magic trick
because there's just an error so I I I
very I it's a it's very salent for me
wow okay to avoid the divide by zero if
you divide by zero it's an error it's
undefined we we don't know what to do
there yet we know these two theories
work in their own realm their own
regimes the small and the large you
bring them together it's a shotgun
wedding that won't necessarily work as
you had planned so we got top people
working on it no we I we can't tell you
what's happening inside the singularity
all right remains a mystery yes you ever
wanted one of your questions on the
universe answered we all have questions
about the universe black holes to
quazars quantum entanglement wormholes
there is no end to the depths of cosmic
curiosity well the entry level of
patreon membership with Star Talk gets
you just that I think it starts at $5 a
month you have access to the question
line that reaches our Cosmic query
programming and not only that we produce
a special Cosmic
queries installment just for patreon
members if you weren't the director of
the Hayden planetarium what do you think
you would be doing what okay but this
have to be another Universe it wouldn't
happen in this universe okay I'd be I'd
be a a songwriter for Broadway musicals
o so so that's the entry level and the
perks ascend from there uh there's a
level in fact where we send you a an
autographed copy of one of my latest
books uh right now it's Star Messenger
Cosmic perspectives on civilization and
it's signed with my fancy fountain pen
with purple ink so I I invite you to
just check the link below and all of
that money goes to our ability to
experiment with new ways of bringing the
universe down to earth so thank you for
those who have already joined and we
welcome others to participate in this
Grand Adventure of what it is to bring
the universe down to earth as always
keep looking up uh yogas J wrote hello
to my personal astrophysicist if someone
keeps traveling back and forth at plank
length distance does it mean that it's
traveling eternally uh
he did put a parenthetical which says an
idea SL attempt to say that the
particles don't come in and out of
existence they are just traveling
eternally at plank length distances and
four forces hits them at the right time
to let them exist in this universe
[Music]
okay yeah I that I don't know what he's
talking about I can tell you this a
plank length is the smallest unit of
length that we can measure it's very
very small it almost doesn't make sense
it's not the size it's what you do with
it
it turns out in quantum
physics everything is in
motion everything vibrates at all times
so exhausting to say you have something
moving back and forth across a a plank
length all matter is doing that at all
times because everything is always in
motion always so to say let's do it at a
plank length plank length and it's time
at Infinity I don't know how the
connecting plank length and infinity
time in that question but uh everything
is always in motion at all times and it
has nothing to do with measuring time at
Infinity gotcha all right especially in
this city huh New York City all right
I'm fired okay
uh uh this is from Vin cashi app he says
hello first name v v okay V mhm it's how
would say Vinnie if I was being fancy
okay okay v v uh he's uh hello this is
vene from India I was just wondering why
black holes can't just be dark matter
there seems to be a lot of them they are
massive and seem to have more gravity
most importantly we can't see them let's
list the Dark Matter candidates would
there be dark clouds could there
be Vagabond planets that are not
illuminated by a hostar that got ejected
into the Galaxy could it be black holes
it turns out the physics of the early
Universe limits how much ordinary matter
there can be black holes count as
ordinary matter because you make them
from ORD ordinary matter it limits it
you it's there's a delicate set of knobs
that we're turning in the early
Universe to understand what we what the
universe was and what it
became and so these knobs are they're
fascinating because some combinations of
knobs don't work at all you don't get a
universe or you uh you get a universe
that's very different from what we have
so the problem with dark matter is it
doesn't interact with ordinary matter in
any way other than by gravity and so if
you look at what it does in the universe
during the early
Universe it can't be regular matter
otherwise we'd have a universe
completely different from we have and
black holes are made of ordinary matter
it has to be something completely exotic
beyond the measurements we've made of
electrons protons neutrons atoms
molecules solids biology chemistry
physics psychology everything that we
know and love Falls outside of what dark
matter can be so let's say we have very
good theoretical evidence theoretical
support for why Dark Matter can't be
blackold are we have Mike Muhammad k I
assume it's pronounced as a
birdwood uh greetings Dr Tyson Mike C
from Berlin Germany while it's well
known that most of Earth's energy
originates from the Sun I'm curious
about the source of tidal energy can it
be traced back to the Sun or does it
stem from a different origin is it
possible that tidal energy has multiple
sources I love that because when we talk
about green energy we talk about
renewable energy and if you could turn
plants into gasoline which we do with
ethanol um which which is the one from
corn my wife is from Nebraska so she's
going to be very disappointed if I don't
know the corn thing kick your ass yeah I
think ethanol we get that from corn and
corn is a renewable resource all right
it's not fossil fuels where you take it
out you can't wait for new fossils to
form all right that's not how that works
so that's why one is renewable and one
isn't by the way do you know the
original energy source of fossil fuels
the sun oh there you go oh you're going
to say dinosaur I'm going to say
dinosaurs no it's mostly plant life at
the time but where's Plant get its
energy from the Sun put us into this so
all fossil fuels is energy from sunlight
it's just not renewable because it's a
onetime use so all plants get their
energy All Surface plants get their
energy from the Sun you eat plants you
get energy from that if you eat meat you
eat some animal that ate an animal or
eight
plants and so that the tracking is back
to the sun now here's something deep uh
what generally do fish
eat I was going to say fish food that
was what came to my
first fish food of course they eat well
do they eat stuff in the ocean algae and
stuff eat other fish yeah but then who
well I'm getting there good one good one
this is this is where I'm headed okay
this is Turtles all the way down it's
all the way down but but it can't go all
the way down this is why you can't
there's no such thing is a
stable
cannibal
Society it's not stable amongst other
reasons I'm sure I'm sorry I'm not
ranking the reasons I'm just offering
reasons uh
because you can't just keep eating each
other right because you will run out of
people sure but you can say well why
don't we reproduce faster than we eat
that's not possible I because if you're
a fully nourished human being you have
to eat at least a whole other human
being right because you are a human
being right you have to at least that
and if you just run the numbers you can
you can never have a stable thing you're
only eating other things that are being
born within it at some point you need a
source from the outside so the big fish
eats the little fish eats the little
fish eats the little fish this goes all
all the way down until you get to
Plankton so the fish start eating all
the way down right and then you get to
some point where if that's all that was
happening the ocean would just eat
itself and there'd be no living things
no fishes left in the ocean something
has to come in from the outside
somebody's got to deliver the groceries
SpongeBob he has a pineapple under the
sea you got it you got it um his
pineapple is actually in the sea yeah
that's true just we need to correct that
okay I'm just saying I don't mean to get
all technical on SpongeBob but you
finally reached the level of Plankton
SpongeBob nailed it and there are two
categories of Plankton okay one of them
eats other life forms in the ocean the
other for nourishment the other gets it
energy from the Sun and they all live
right at the surface where they can get
sunlight
that is the base of the food chain of
the ocean the phol Plankton if you kill
them off you will systematically render
extinct every other fish in the ocean
that eats other fish now there might be
some fish that eat like the kelp and
seaweed and things there might be some
because but where does kelp get its
energy from the sun right okay so the
sun is the ultimate source of all energy
in the in the typical fishes that we
think of in the ocean however the ocean
in C certain parts is open to what's
below it what's below below the ocean
well you get through the crust and below
the crust is is the is the mantle and in
the mantle is magma beneath that
Godzilla according to the films oh is
that right okay I did not know that the
hollow Earth
yes thank you for enriching this
scientific discussion here with so I
keep thinking this should be a magma Pi
that would be a fun sort
of a really cool mustache that is past
the point of boiling So Below the crust
we get the mantle and within the mantle
is magma okay molten rock Earth has
retained still a considerable amount of
heat from when it formed and that heat
wants to get out and it gets out through
volcanoes uh through crevasses in the in
the bottom of the ocean the mid ocean
ridge are just such a place one of these
ridges goes through Iceland the country
Iceland is growing because the
continental plates are separating magma
gurgles up hardens and is more Iceland
okay that's a very good plan for the
future we have discovered life forms
that thrive on
geochemical
energy enabled by these hot vents at the
bottom of the ocean
in apocalyptic Earth even if the sun
burns out if the sun if someone pluck
the Sun out of the solar system and we
fly off at a tangent into Interstellar
space we will all die rapidly but the
life forms at the bottom of the ocean
that are warm from the magma oozing up
through the vents they'll be just fine
they will survive the death of Earth's
surface so that's another source of
energy by the way geothermal energy
because I is sitting on a on a at the
separation of two continental plates
they're almost entirely geothermally
driven their carbon footprint is
minuscule they have so much energy they
send water under their
streets so that it never gets icy in the
winter we don't need snow plows just
heat the heat the streets right so so
that's another sort of it's renewable in
the sense that it's like a near infinite
supply of Earth energy available to us
all right yes it would one day run out
but not really because we had something
to do with it all right it's the
volcano's got have you seen Earth yeah
get angry all right it's got a lot to
kill us in the future so that's another
source of energy so these are different
ways so another way is
hydroelectric okay so those would be
dams you have water up here and that
that has a certain height that it can
fall gaining kinetic energy sure and it
comes through a turbine that then drives
a generator that makes
electricity so what's that based on how
did the water get up to the top of the
dam the sun evaporated it from the ocean
brought it up to a cloud the cloud moved
over the land rained on the land it
brought the water up to the up to the
upper levels
that's solar power hydroelectric is
solar power how about
wind why does air move horizontally on
the earth you know what Ogden Nash said
he said wind is caused by trees waving
their
branches and I thought that was good
like how would you know it wasn't that I
feel like we do know that I feel we're
we're about to lead into the fact that
that can't be yeah it was just a it's a
clever kind of fun stupid observation
the only thing I know about Nash is he
has a great equilibrium oh that's the
mathematician different Nash that's a
totally different Nash and the founder
of Nashville oh I don't know who that
would be I assume he's a Nash so wind
comes from the unequal heating of
Earth's surface that creates air that
rises air that falls and that also
creates pressure differences that'll
move air horizontally as well as up and
down so wind energy is solar energy set
up a solar panel what do we call that
energy solar
solar that's taking out the middleman
and then you have solar power is solar
en so all of these are solar power that
is in principle renewable until the sun
runs out of energy all right how about
Tides Tides Sosh back and forth love it
well we associate commonly associate
Tides with the moon sure so the moon
Tides have nothing to do with the Sun so
if you have a tidal thing that drifts
with it and generates energy it's also
renewable because you're always going to
have Tides but it's not tracable to the
sun however onethird of the tides you
measure comes from the sun how's it
doing that well the full name is Looney
solar Tides Looney Moon Solar Sun Looney
solar Tides the tides we all experience
are Looney solar
tides and the Moon is like two-thirds of
it and the Sun is oneir at all times
at all times if you're using Tides some
of that is the sun most of it is the
moon and so there you have it that's the
difference from all of this but if you
pull fossils out of the ground you're
not renewing that and when you run out
of fossils you're done oh by the way
there's thermonuclear
Fusion we haven't harnessed it yet we
know how to create it they're called
bombs but when you harness it a lot of
energy that's a lot of energy you can
create a power plant
and that's fusing hydrogen together to
make helium the sun does that every day
so we just be mimicking the sun on Earth
uh it's the nuclear fision that has
dirty byproducts and that's what the
original atom bombs were made of fision
bombs but nuclear fusion that's the Holy
Grail but here's I saw a bumper sticker
once that said no nukes so a a very
green sort of progressive left leaning
bumper sticker no nukes but the in the
no was a
sun which is the ultimate nuclear weapon
ultimate nuclear furnace is the sun okay
if you had no nukes you wouldn't be here
all right well you know what they mean
of course they don't want like nuclear
energy they want solar energy but solar
energy is nuclear I think at the time I
saw this bumper sticker was still in the
Cold War so maybe they were talking
about the nuclear arsenals for sure but
the fact that they had a son there it
still tells me that they were thinking
of generating power sure yeah use solar
power rather than uh nuclear power but
one other quick source of energy because
the big problem with solar energy is how
do you store it if you want to use it at
night how do you use solar energy no you
can't okay Tides still move in and out
at night that works hydroelectric you
can use that at night that all still
works but how do you use solar panel so
there's talk now of using solar panels
to lift heavy weights
up a hillside so turn photons into
potential energy that then becomes
kinetic later so that's your storage
battery becomes solar power lifting all
these weights up into the air so it's a
successful way to store the solar energy
that you had earlier and then you could
draw from it at any time of day or night
that's amazing it's very clever yeah
there's a lot of balls at the top of
hills and like don't touch them this is
powering the whole city
yeah so anyhow there there you have it
that's everything that was not even
asked in that
question answered about where energy
comes from and I like dirty byproducts
I'm going to make that my next Comedy
album it's going to be called Dirty
byproducts dirty byproducts all right we
have one more question we got time for
one more go give it to me uh it's this
is from Cicero artifon heyart that's a
cool you got admit that's a CO really
cool name that's like a Sci-Fi hero I
want that name Cicero he's the hero of
like a Blade Runner kind of Trilogy
Cicero artifon or he's like the
president in The Hunger Games you need
an evil variant of yeah exactly he can
go either way so hopefully hopefully
this cro is leading towards good but he
said hey smart people Cicero from
Toronto Canada he's from Canada so
probably good people uh Neil mentioned
once that the element osmium 76 is
heavier than gold 79 how can that be
possible don't the elements have an
increase of mass the lower they are on
the table he's slightly misremembering
what I said oh no that's okay uh so as
you go up the periodic table the
elements become more and more massive
right more and more massive no doubt
about it you're packing more protons
into the nucleus he mentioned how many
protons were in osmium I forgot he said
76 I'll believe him gold was 79 was it
okay that's what he said yeah okay
uranium is 92 these are bigger heavier
atoms all the way that's not what
distinguishes osmium if you create a
lump of these
materials a lump of osmium a lump of
gold a lump of them how close together
will the atoms pack in this lump that
you have created that's the question it
turns out given the properties of atoms
and the periodic table and the quantum
physics of nuclei and energy levels and
atoms you can pack osmium atoms closer
together than all the other kinds of
atoms thereby making the densest element
not the heaviest element the densest
element because now they're packed in
close together so osmium would make the
world's best paper weight that I mean it
could make a a wedding ring how come we
don't use it in place of any of these
precious metals why would you why' you
want it to be heavier but we we like
gold this way you you remember that
you're married I be like oh my God I I
can never forget no then it's bar lift
my it's a ball and chain
analogy here's the osmium ball you're
going to carry around so uh so that's
the that's the only difference and just
to to quantify that how dense these
things are a cubic foot of gold oh my
gosh it's like you know it's it gold has
two and a half
times the density of iron that's gold
and osmium tops that and osmium I think
uh may be used in the tips of some
fountain pens because it has to be very
hard
you're pring on it there's a lot of
pressure there so it has its utilities
but paper weights are not among
them so that's why we're talking about
the density of an aggregate of those
atoms not the weight of an atom itself
nice that's I think that's all the time
we have amazing well well it's great to
have you back thank you it's been so
great to be here appreciate it yeah yeah
and you're uh so how do we find you in
the city they can find me uh on social
media Harrison comedy on Instagram oh
Harrison comedy Harrison
and Harrison green.com uh is my website
okay ex excellent and you perform I
perform every night I'm all over I have
my Off Broadway Comedy and Magic Show on
Saturdays at asy when you're when you're
on Broadway I don't think this no no
it's great so well if enough people buy
tickets maybe so it's a g no it's great
because you do magic and comedy and uh
and we love you here we'll try to get
you back I would love that thank so much
all right this has been Star Talk a
cosmic queries grab bag Edition with
Harrison greenbound that's me all right
uh we'll see you next time as always
keep looking up
[Music]